# Scripting

## Approach

Each container hook permits exactly one command to be run, as the specified user (default is vscode).

We construct this command from an array of commands generated by the `devenv.yaml` settings, joined with `&&`.

Each command is automatically preceded by a blue log line "Starting" and will be followed by either a
green "Completed" or a red "Errored!" line if the script terminates with a non-zero result.

## Files

Each of these files will be loaded into a base64 string for portability and invoked in the container via:

```
printf <encoded> | base64 -d | bash
```

## Invocation

The bash invocation uses `-euo pipefail` so it will terminate with a non-zero return code on any error.

It is possible to use bash logical constructs like `(a && b) || c` without triggering errors allowing
success if either `a` or `b` fail but `c` does not.

## Env Vars

As few env vars as possible should be required. We are adopting a naming convention of `DEVENV_*`.

The following are all devcontainer filesystem locations:

* DEVENV_xxx_CACHE_MOUNT_DIR - where the xxx cache volume will be mounted, typically /mnt/xxx-cache
* DEVENV_xxx_USER_DIR - where recursive chown commands will begin
* DEVENV_xxx_CACHE_MOUNT_LINK - where the mounted cache is symlinked for use

Multiple values are used so that the symlinked cache location can be several layers deep in a userland
directory structure. For example, a tool called magic might require:

* a user directory structure chown'ed to the container user at `$HOME/.magic/`
* a shared cache, which we mount in each container at `/mnt/magic-cache`
* a symlink to that cache at `$HOME/.magic/magiccache/`
* lock files at `$HOME/.magic/.magiclock/`

## Logging

Logs are written to appropriately named files in /var/log/ which can be tailed through the ide or docker exec.

## Failure

A non-zero return code from any of onCreateCommand, postCreateCommand, postStartCommand does not stop the container
or the IDE. You may, at best, get an error popup. For this reason, the error logging has been coloured red to
maximise its visibility, but this may not be sufficient.
